Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Theodore Sturgeon is one of the finest
writers science fiction and fantasy has ever produced. For 45 years, Sturgeon
has created imaginative fiction that is noted for its innovative themes and
perfection of style. A large percentage of his works have become classics in the
field. His novel More Than Human, for example, are the powerful short story
"Thunder and Roses". We spoke with Sturgeon recently and asked him to tell us how
he became a writer. I began to write when I was an able seaman in the Merchant
Marine. And how that came about was that I left home before I graduated from
high school. It's a fascinating thing. I lecture at colleges and universities
all over the United States and in England and in France. And I have yet to get
my high school diploma. Someday somebody will grant me an honorary high school
diploma. But anyway, I was on the ships and you had a lot of time to read. And I
conceived the idea of an absolutely foolproof crime that would net me thousands
and thousands of dollars. And I even did research on it. I was on a coastwise
tanker. And as I was going up and down the coast, when we'd stop at a port, I
would send off a letter to the railroad. So it was one of the things that was
involved. And the insurance companies, that was another, and the post office,
that was still another. I got all my research done as to how to commit this
particular kind of robbery. And, you know, they had letters carefully written so
that nobody would know what I was up to. And when I had all my material, I found
that I did not have the immoral courage to commit the crime. So I wrote it as a
story. This was way back in the late 30s. And I sent my story off to a newspaper
syndicate. I didn't know anything about writing particularly. And they were
buying 1,500-word short short stories that they published every day in the
syndicate. And when I got up to New York in the ship, to my amazement, I got a
letter of acceptance. And so I quit the sea and came ashore to be a writer. And
I got my money not on acceptance but on publication. And it was five whole
dollars. And they would buy one and sometimes two stories a week but no more.
And so four and a half months or so, I lived on five and sometimes ten dollars a
week. My room cost me seven. And whatever I saved, I could eat. And I learned a
lot about being hungry. Did you ever notice that pound cake has no crust on the
ends? What they do is chop them off and they sell them in their day-old store.
And at that time, you could get a whole shopping bag full of cake ends for a
nickel. And so I used to live on that. One time, I got a whole shopping bag full
and it was moldy but I ate it anyhow. And I was so sick, I didn't eat for three
days. And so I saved myself some money. You know, I was like that. It was a hard
school. It really was.
Sturgeon persisted as a writer, though, earning his living writing pulp fiction.
And pulp fiction, we should add, that surpassed almost anything else coming out
in the pulp format. Then Sturgeon met someone who gave his career a big boost.
Then I finally, after some months of that, and I think I went back to sea for a
short while, I finally met John Campbell in 1939, early 1939. He was the editor
of Astounding Science Fiction and a wonderful fantasy magazine called Unknown.
And so I started writing for him. And then after that, it just exploded. One
time, I had four stories on the stands at the same time. In those two magazines,
I had to get two new names.
So it was an interesting beginning. On our next show, we'll continue our
conversation with Theodore Sturgeon.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Much of Theodore Sturgeon's early science
fiction and fantasy was published in the pulp magazines of the 30s and 40s. Yet
Sturgeon is known as one of the finest stylists science fiction has ever
produced. And the pulps were not exactly a seedbed for perfection of style. When
we spoke with Sturgeon, we observed that he hardly belongs to the pulp category.
Well, you know, this is difficult with the whole matter of categorization.
Anyway, we're in the grip of the taxonomist. And people who put labels on things
and stick them into cubby holes. Taxonomy has its uses. There's no question
about that. You have to be able to find and retrieve information, and that's
what taxonomy is all about. But more and more there seems to come over our whole
culture the idea that if you can put a label on it, you understand it. And that
is not what taxonomy is for. Taxonomy is handles by which you can pick something
up and look at it. But for so many people, in so many ways, the label is
sufficient. You know, he's a Republican, or his mother was a Jew, or, yeah, he,
you know, he's a poet, he's an esbyte, or whatever. They're all labels. And
there's a little effort made to understand what's under these labels. Pulp
fiction has suffered from the same thing. Pulp actually referred to the kind of
paper it was printed on, not to its quality. There was the pulps and there were
the slicks. The slicks were magazines like the Saturday Evening Post and
Collier's. And the Ladies' Home Journal. And the pulps were things like Black
Mask and Air War stories and science fiction and fantasy and the like. But it
was so easy for the taxonomists and for people who don't pay proper attention to
what was going on to feel that pulp was a qualitative comment and slick was also
qualitative. Slick paper was better literature than pulp paper.
Some of the finest writing around. Some of
the best pulp writers as such. I mean, the best writers of the time began in
pulp. And they only gravitated to the slicks, not because they got better, but
because they got paid more. Ray Bradbury is a perfect example of that. So is
Dashiell Hammett and the like. We asked Sturgeon why he devoted himself to
science fiction and fantasy. Why didn't he write regular or mainstream fiction?
Well, first of all, because I love the field. Because it's the only genre which
has no limitations whatsoever. A lot of people there, the taxonomists, they're
into it again. They feel that science fiction is the literature of the future
and of space, which is nonsense. It's true that a lot of it is, but you can
write science fiction about the past, you can write science fiction about that
marvelous place called Other. Just some Other place that doesn't have any
reference to where we go in the future. That's the best kind. That's the kind
that I think one of the things that science fiction is for. If you don't like
the government, go ahead and create a new kind of government. Give it a push and
see how it works. You can study whole cultures and religions and also some
literature and art. I've gone into that in some of my stories, which are
essentially in places that occur just Other. Not in the future or in the past
necessarily. One of the very finest science fiction books around is by somebody
I'm very proud to call one of my ex-students. It's called Wild Seed. It's by
Octavia Butler. And it begins somewhere around the 17th century and goes up to
about 1910, which is hardly future fiction. It's a totally original structure,
original idea, and beautifully, beautifully written. That lady is tremendous.
She really is. One of the big ones. When Sturgeon began publishing his fiction
back in the late 30s, science fiction had not yet exploded. Most of it was still
published in pulp magazines rather than books. The pulp authors were often
writers who also wrote westerns, adventure fiction, detectives, and so forth.
Sturgeon contributed greatly to the growing popularity of science fiction and
indeed helped usher it into its golden age. We'll talk about such matters on our
next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science
Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Theodore Sturgeon has influenced science
fiction as few other writers have. He began publishing science fiction and
fantasy in the late 1930s and quickly became recognized as one of the most
unique stylists and thinkers in the field. We asked him if he associated with
any other writers in those early days. Was there any sense of community or
fellowship among science fiction writers? Oh, sure. I am characteristically not
a joiner as such. There was a group called the Hydra Club, which was completely
informal. And the rule one was that there are no rules for this organization. An
awful lot of people belonged to the Hydra Club. And through that, in the early
years, I got to know all sorts of people like Horace Gold and Fred Pohl and
Henry Kuttner and so on. Well, the whole raft of those early writers, I think I
knew them all. And there was a group there. Fred Pohl has written about them
called the Futurians. I was never involved in that particularly. I attended the
very first Milford Science Fiction Writers Conference in Milford, New Jersey. I
guess that was in 1951. And Judith Merril I was very close to. Well, I knew
virtually everybody in the field at that time, except one or two of the West
Coast people.
Back in the 40s, Sturgeon's style and his innovative themes were startlingly
fresh in a field that was noted for its cliches and formulas. Science fiction
author, critic, and historian James Gunn has written that because of Theodore
Sturgeon, other writers have been freer to write what they wish to write and
were able to find a market for it. We wondered if Sturgeon were conscious of
himself as having that kind of role. Not at all. Not at all. I tell you, the
last few years have been real revelations to me. For one thing, I didn't realize
that I'd had so much personal impact on people. Until, what was it, six years or
so now, I went to Italy. And a woman came up to me dragging an interpreter. And
the interpreter said, she doesn't speak any English, but there are two things
that she wants to tell you. One of them is that you write women better than any
writer she knows. And the other thing is that because of something that you
wrote, she did not kill herself one night. And the woman began to cry, and the
interpreter began to cry, and I began to cry. And it was quite an experience. I
suddenly realized that what I have done, apparently, I've been able to reach a
great many people far deeper than I had any idea that I was doing. When I look
back over the mail that I've gotten over the years, I realized how many people
in how many different ways have told me that same kind of thing. It's extremely
gratifying. It's also a little frightening. I mean, it's frightening enough to
make you terrified of touching your typewriter. Barry Malzberg, another author
and critic of science fiction, has called Sturgeon the most important science
fiction writer of the 40s. Malzberg says that because of Sturgeon's style, his
internalization or use of psychology, and his quirky characters, he opened the
door for everything that happened in the 50s. Sturgeon read Malzberg's
assessment. His response is interesting. Yeah, I'll tell you quickly a story. A
few years ago, there was a little boy who went to see his buddy. He was 67 years
old. His mother told him to be back before dark. And he was so busy playing with
his friend that he looked out the window and saw it was dark. And he went
rushing home. And like little kids will, he dragged a stick along a picket
fence. And when he got to the corner, he whanged it against the lamppost. And
immediately, all the lights in the northeastern United States went out. Remember
that one, that big blackout? He went rushing home to his mother, weeping, and
threw himself into her arms. And said, God, Mommy, I didn't mean it. I didn't
mean it. Well, this is the way I felt when I first read things like this. More
with Theodore Sturgeon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. Theodore Sturgeon is known as one of the
finest short story writers who has ever written science fiction and fantasy. But
he's also published novels. One of them, More Than Human, is a genuine science
fiction classic. It came out in 1953 and won the International Fantasy Award in
1954. More Than Human is really three interconnected stories dealing with
extrasensory powers. It depicts, in Sturgeon's impressionistic style, the coming
together of six freaks, children who have latent psy-powers but who are lost and
ineffectual when they are alone. But as a group, a gestalt that functions as a
single organism, they succeed and become symbolic of a new level of human
maturity. Sturgeon talks about More Than Human. The springboard for that was in
a book by Pearl Buck, which was called Pavilion of Women. I read it so many
years ago that I hardly remember the book at all. But there was one passage in
there which described a monk who took care of some children in a cave in the
woods. And they were uneducated and wild children. They'd have died without him.
And he was just an impoverished monk himself. And he took care of these raggedy
little children. And that image always stayed with me. And somehow that and the
whole idea of what would happen if each of these children, coming from various
places and being various kinds of children, had very special ESP talents. And
again, it was a question of investigating what the impact would be on the world
as a whole as some of the newly recognized proclivities of the human mind came
up. And this, of course, there are literally thousands of books that have been
written on that theme since then. Sturgeon says the book has been his most
popular among readers. When I sold Finnish and Israeli rights two years ago, it
got into its 15th and 16th languages. And just how many editions, I have no idea
genuinely. I know there are five or six English editions and several Spanish and
a number of French and four Japanese editions. And I think I'm proudest of all
of that. If a novel can pass the language barrier and the cultural barrier and
go into more editions, then I think that's a real achievement.
Another Sturgeon novel is Venus Plus X, a book strong on ideas. And the main
idea is sexual stereotyping in our society, the seemingly predetermined roles
men and women must take on. Sturgeon talks about the impetus behind Venus Plus
X. That came about by I was leafing through a magazine, and I saw an ad for, of
all things, tire chains. Weed tire chains. And there was a photograph of a girl
in her underwear holding out a tire chain. And it stopped me cold. I thought,
what on earth has that got to do with a tire chain? Clearly, you know, it was a
grabber by the advertising business. Makes you stop and look at the ad. But what
has a girl without clothes got to do with a tire chain? And I began to
think, what kind of a civilization, what would it be like to live in a culture
where there was no particular sexual bias at all? And so I started, first of
all, creating a society in which there was no sexual at all, that people were,
they generated like oysters, which can be both either male or female. But at the
beginning, they're neither. And I couldn't make that work. So I went in another
direction and created a race of people. And each individual was both sexes.
And therefore, there was no sexual differentiation. They were just people. And
it got into their love and marriage, their sexuality, also into their art, their
literature, their architecture, and so on. I had a ball with that. Venus Plus X
is not, you know, really a novel at all. It's a tract. It's an exposition of
the ideas that I was getting at the time. We'll continue our conversation with
Theodore Sturgeon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Science fiction author Theodore Sturgeon
is justly famous as an innovator. His innovations have come in various areas,
but perhaps the most important is his introduction into science fiction of
themes that had never before been treated by the genre. Right. Taboo themes,
such as homosexuality and incest, among others. We asked Sturgeon if he
deliberately shattered taboos. Yes, I have purposely broken taboos. And, you
know, I wrote the first stories in science fiction about homosexuality, for
example, which dealt with homosexuality and with incest. And I had a three
-parter in Omni last year which dealt with cannibalism. But these stories were
not about homosexuality and about incest and about cannibalism. Essentially,
they were about confrontation. All my life I've been infuriated by people who
shuck away from an idea. I don't want to hear about that. I don't, no, don't
tell me that. I don't want to hear it. You know, that always angers me. Because
only by confrontation can we really learn anything. The whole history of, well,
a subject like masturbation, for example, which absolutely terrified the three
or four generations before mine and preoccupied them, too. The inventor of one
of our more famous breakfast foods, he was a nutritional doctor. And he used to
write dietary and medical advice books for the home. And about 75% of them has
to do with masturbation and how it will make your hair fall out and give you a
softening of the brain and tuberculosis and cancer and all kinds of things.
Nowadays, with a little confrontation and a little research and study, you can
read in the highest level of women's magazines not only how to do it but how to
do it well. And it's become a totally accepted practice. But the horror that
went on, because people would not confront it or would not find out what the
truth was, caused so much frightful damage. I mean, people committed suicide
over that. I had a relative whose whole life was absolutely made hell by his
preoccupation with that. And to be tempted and be tempted and finally to yield
and then feel guilty and feel guilty and so guilty that he would never tell
anybody about it. It wrecked his whole life. You know, people have got to
confront. Sturgeon has confronted many controversial or painful ideas in his
novels and short stories. He continues to tell us why he does so. If we meet,
you will probably see me wearing a little silver medallion. It's a letter cute
with an arrow through it. It's my trademark. And what it means is ask the next
question. To me, it's the symbol of everything that humanity has ever created.
And it's the only way it has been created, by people asking the next question,
the one that follows. And so often people ask the next question, the one that
follows, and the one that follows until they suddenly come to a question. They
don't want to ask because they're afraid they might get the answer. And there
they stop. And when you stop asking the next question, you die. You become a
zombie and join the ranks of the zombies you see marching around you who have
stopped asking the next question. It's a very symbol of life and of progress and
of science and everything toward basic truth. When you ever reach basic truth,
you'll find not a thing or a precept, but you'll find a process. You'll find
something going on. And this is the way I've been thinking apparently all my
life. I get very, very irritated when I find that people refuse to think beyond
a certain point. There's a bumper sticker that goes around in the Bible belt.
God said it. I believe it. That settled it. When you see a bumper sticker like
that, you've just heard the crash of a closing mind. There's plenty of room out
there to confront the whole idea of God and to go on with it and ask the next
question and the question that follows without committing any particular kind of
sin.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.